---
layout: post
title: Natural Units and Constants
mathjax: true
excerpt: Hello, today we're going to be talking about a very interesting topic in Physics, Natural Units and Natural Constants. What are natural units you may ask? The idea is to measure things in terms of the universe itself, the constants of nature. To dive into all the juicy details, we must first talk about units. 
---
Hello, today we're going to be talking about a very interesting topic in Physics, Natural Units and Natural Constants. What are natural units you may ask? The idea is to measure things in terms of the universe itself, the constants of nature. To dive into all the juicy details, we must first talk about units. 

## Units
There are four fundamental base units, Time $[T]$, Length $[L]$, Mass $[M]$, and Charge $[C]$. Out of these base units, we can construct the units for any other quantity we want. For example, force is expressed in units of $[M][L][T]^{-2}$. What unit we choose to measure any of these is completely arbitrary. You can pick up some stick and start measuring distances between objects by counting how many sticks long it is. So if our unit of choice is arbitrary, what's all the rage about SI units? Well, although we can indeed measure with any unit we like, we would also like to talk to others about what we measure. Collaboration is an indispensible part of doing science. Ok I may define the unit stick as this stick I pick up from my backyard. But, someone else's stick they find in their backyard could be a completely different size. This is no good for communicating science and reproducing someone else's experiments and discoveries. Because of this, we as scientists all agree to use the same standardized units, and the result is what we today call SI units. We have $[T] =$ [second](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second) = s, $[L] =$ [meter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metre) = m, $[M] =$ [kilogram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilogram) = kg, and $[C] =$ [Coulomb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coulomb) = C. Each of these units have a very fascinating history of how they were defined, and how standards were maintained, and I strongly recommend checking out the wikipedia links to each, or any study of history you like. In recent years, there has been a push to redefine all these units in terms of natural constants, to remove an element of human decision from how we view units, so we shall talk about natural constants next. 

## Natural Constants
The first natural constant many encounter is the gravity constant $G$ in Newton's law. Here $m_1, m_2$ are masses, $r$ is the distance between them, and $\vec e_r$ is the radial unit vector pointing from $m_1$ to $m_2$.
\\[ \vec F_G = -G\frac{m_1 m_2}{r^2}\vec e_r \\]
So what exactly does $G$ mean here? Well, if we plug in mass and length units of only one, we get back $G$. So if we have objects with magnitude one in our units, $G$ is the force that will act between them. This gives $G$ different numerical values depending on your units of mass and length, and in general it must be experimentally determined. It is, what we call a constant of nature. We will revisit this idea in the next section. We see that the modern electric constant $\epsilon_0$ and magnetic constant $\mu_0$ take very similar forms. Here, $q$ will be a source charge, $I$ will be a source current, $\vec l$ is the directed length of this current, and $r$ will be the distance from these sources. $\vec E$ and $\vec B$ are the electric and magnetic fields. We write the fields instead of the forces for convenience. Also we use $\tau$ to denote $2\pi$, for a lot of good reasons that I will not get into here. See Michael Hartl's [Tau Manifesto](https://tauday.com/tau-manifesto).
\\[  \vec E = \frac{q}{2\tau \epsilon_0 r^2}\vec e_r  \\]
\\[  d\vec B = \mu_0 \frac{I d\vec l\times \vec e_r}{2\tau r^2} \\]
So these constants all take very similar forms, except for the factor of $2\tau$ introduced, why did we put those in for the electric and magnetic fields? Well it turns out that in the resulting differential equations, which is the language of physicists, a factor of $2\tau$ comes down, and it's most natural to get this out of the differential equation. Consider for instance the comparison between Gauss's law for the gravity field $\vec g$ vs the electric field. Here $\rho_m, \rho_q$ are the densities of mass $m$ and charge $q$.
\\[ \nabla\cdot \vec g = -2\tau G\rho_m \\]
\\[ \nabla\cdot \vec E = \frac{\rho_q}{\epsilon_0} \\]
Physicists just don't want to deal with this factor of $2\tau$ so they included it in the original natural constant. This process of getting the $2\tau$ factor out of the differential equation is called "rationalizing". I don't know why no one has done this for the gravity constant yet, but we'll do it here. Let $\gamma_0 = 2\tau G$, and that's it. All these constants we have discussed so far are the realm of what physicists call classical mechanics, electrostatics, and magnetostatics. They eventually figured out these don't work for every situation, and we end up finding two more constants. Funnily enough, one of them is a multiple of two constants we've found so far. First, when physicists discovered special relativity (the physics of very fast moving objects), the speed of light $c = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\epsilon_0 \mu_0}}$ was very relevant. It ends up being the cosmic speed limit, nothing in the universe can travel faster than $c$. Every formula of interest in special relativity involves $c$, such as time dilation, length contraction, lorentz transformations, proper time. The next constant was discovered in quantum mechanics, planck's constant $\hbar$. $\hbar$ is the proportionality constant between a particle's energy and angular momentum, as well as the proportionality constant between a particle's momentum and wavenumber. It also makes an appearance in the time evolution equation, what many call Schrödinger's equation. Funnily enough, $\hbar$ is the smallest amount of angular momentum a particle can have, well with one caveat, really the particles called fermions can take on values of $\pm \frac{\hbar}{2}$, but them being able to take on fractional values of angular momentum is very important. More appropriately, $\hbar$ sets the scale on which energy, momentum, and angular momentum are discretized, coming in packets that are integer (or half integer) multiples of the respective things discussed. Another constant of interest is the charge for an electron $e$. This is the smallest amount of charge a particle can have, every other charge in the universe is an integer multiple of $e$, once again we have a fractional exception in the form of quarks which can have a third the charge of an electron, but this is important once again. We now have all the natural constants of interest, and we are ready to talk about natural units.

## Natural Units
As a move away from a reliance on human definitions, SI redefined many of their constants in 2019 in terms of natural constants. As an example, the meter is now defined to be the distance light travels in $\frac{1}{299,792,458}$ seconds. This definition of the meter gives light a numerical value of $299, 792, 458$ m/s. Our choice of units determines what numerical value a constant of nature takes on in our equations. So what is the most natural possible numerical value to take on? Well the answer is one, this is super nice, in fact it's so nice that we don't even have to write the constants in our equations anymore. This saves a lot of writing and headache, especially because the values of the constants are only a consequence of our choice of units! In order to do this though, we must first express our base units $[T], [L], [M], [C]$ in terms of our constants. We will first tackle the first three. We can write down a system of equations in terms of $c, \hbar, \gamma_0$.
\\[  c = \frac{[L]}{[T]} \\]
\\[ \hbar = \frac{[M][L]^2}{[T]} \\]
\\[ \gamma_0 = \frac{[L]^3}{[M][T]^2} \\]
We call the solutions to these equations the planck time $t_p$, length $l_p$, and mass $m_p$. The SI conversion will be given to provide a sense of scale of these units compared to the everyday units we're used to.
\\[ t_p = \sqrt{\frac{\gamma_0\hbar}{c^5}} = 1.911081162\times 10^{-43} \text{ seconds} \\]
\\[ l_p = c t_p =  \sqrt{\frac{\gamma_0\hbar}{c^3}} = 5.729277191\times 10^{-35} \text{ meters}\\]
\\[ m_p = \sqrt{ \frac{c\hbar}{\gamma_0} } = 6.139819246\times 10^{-9} \text{ kg} \\]
Alright so far, the base units we've found are pretty clear cut, this is the most straightforward and natural way to define our units. However, in the question of charge, we're left with two equally good contestants. What should we set to one, $\epsilon_0$ or $e$? On one hand, $e$ is the discrete amount of charge everything has, on the other hand, well $\epsilon_0$ is the electric constant. We will discuss both. If we set $e$ to one, then $e = 1.602176634 \times 10^{-19} \text{ Coulombs}$ is our unit of charge. On the other hand, if we solve for $q_p$ using $\epsilon_0$ as our unit.
\\[ \begin{eqnarray} q_p = \sqrt{\epsilon_0 c\hbar} = 5.290817461\times 10^{-19} \text{ Coulombs} \end{eqnarray}\\]
Very interestingly, $e$ and $\epsilon_0$ both set a similar scale, $q_p$ is roughly 3.3 $e$. I personally lean towards setting $\epsilon_0$ to one so I don't have to write it in equations, but we could just as validly set $e$ to one. So that's it, we now have our natural units! We can express anything we like in the most natural way possible! Also save writing constants, and have cleaner equations. The alert reader may have noticed I failed to mention the magnetic constant in all this. Well here's why, this gets set to one too, except we don't have to say it! Because of the relation of $c, \epsilon_0, \mu_0$ setting $c$ to one makes the electric and magnetic constants reciprocals of each other, thus setting either to one makes the other one. Pretty awesome right? To finish the blogpost, here's a montage of equations (in conventional notation) transitioning to natural units.

\\[ \nabla\cdot \vec g = -2\tau G\rho_m \to \nabla\cdot \vec g = -\rho_m\\]
\\[ R_{\mu\nu} - \frac{1}{2}R g_{\mu\nu} = \frac{4\tau G}{c^4}T_{\mu\nu} \to R_{\mu\nu} - \frac{1}{2}R g_{\mu\nu} = 2T_{\mu\nu} \\]
\\[ \nabla\cdot\vec E = \frac{\rho_q}{\epsilon_0} \to \nabla\cdot\vec E = \rho_q \\]
\\[ \nabla\times\vec B = \mu_0 \vec j + \frac{1}{c^2}\frac{\partial \vec E}{\partial t} \to \nabla\times\vec B = \vec j + \frac{\partial \vec E}{\partial t} \\]
\\[ \hat H|\psi\rangle = \hbar i \frac{\partial}{\partial t}|\psi\rangle \to \hat H|\psi\rangle = i \frac{\partial}{\partial t}|\psi\rangle \\]
